---
title: Clarifications to the DNS Ranking Data
abbrev: ranking
docname: draft-fujiwara-dnsop-ranking-data-02

stand_alone: true

ipr: trust200902
area: operations
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: std
consensus: true
stream: IETF
updates: 2181

pi:
  toc: yes
  tocdepth: 4
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes

author:
  -
    ins: K. Fujiwara
    name: Kazunori Fujiwara
    org: Japan Registry Services Co., Ltd.
    abbrev: JPRS
    email: fujiwara@jprs.co.jp
    country: Japan
  -
    ins: W. Toorop
    name: Willem Toorop
    org: NLnet Labs
    street: Science Park 400
    city: Amsterdam
    code: 1098 XH
    country: Netherlands
    email: willem@nlnetlabs.nl

normative:

informative:

--- abstract

This document obsoletes Section 5.4.1 (Ranking data) of RFC 2181,
and specifies directives whereby the source of the data determines for what purposes it may be used.

--- middle

Introduction {#introduction}
=====

The DNS server assumed in {{Section 5.4.1 (Ranking data) of !RFC2181}} is considered to
be a model with a shared database described in {{Section 2.2 (Common configurations) of !RFC1035}} that
has both Authoritative server and Recursive Resolver functions.
It is assumed that information obtained from zone files, zone transfers,
and name resolution will be mixed together.

However, at the time of writing, this is no longer the practice of name servers and resolvers.
Zone transfers transfer the same data from primaries to
secondary servers without any modification.
An authoritative name server function does not mix and return information
obtained from name resolution.



Terminology {#terminology}
=========

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

Many of the specialized terms used in this document are defined in
DNS Terminology {{!RFC9499}}.

Problem Statement
=================

In the past, recursive resolvers would return data from referral responses, such
as delegation information or glue, in the answer section of responses;
however, modern recursive resolvers complete name resolution
with an authoritative response from an authoritative server
that has authority through delegation.
However, there is no clear documentation of this.

"The Ranking Data" only indicates the priority among data, not its validity.
Attacks using responses that do not correspond to queries
and additional data that is not required have been considered and reported,
so unnecessary data should be discarded.

{{!RFC1034}} already describes resolver's answer as follows.

"The ideal answer is one from a server authoritative for the query which
either gives the required data or a name error.  The data is passed back
to the user and entered in the cache for future use if its TTL is
greater than zero." (Quoted from {{!RFC1034, Section 5.3.3}})

"The simplest mode for the client is recursive,
since in this mode the name server acts in the role of a resolver
and returns either an error or the answer, but never referrals."
(Quoted from {{!RFC1034, Section 4.3.1}})

Currently, responses from authoritative servers are considered to include
authoritative name resolution results (NXDOMAIN, NODATA, the RRSet requested),
non-authoritative delegation information,
unnecessary data, and other types of errors,
and each of these is considered to affect how resolvers handle the data.
Therefore, directives on how to handle the data are needed.

Directives
=================

1. Authoritative servers MUST NOT merge zone data. (zone data should be
  retrieved from a source (zone file, internal database, zone
  transfer)

2. Name resolution results (Answer section, or NXDOMAIN, NODATA)
  MUST be authoritative responses from authoritative servers
  that has authority through delegation.

3. Non-authoritative responses (referral/delegation responses) from
  authoritative servers MUST only be used to query the delegated
  authoritative server during the name resolution.

4. Names and IP addresses of the authoritative name servers for zones (such as the root zone) that are built-in or loaded from "hints" files, MUST only be used for priming a resolver for those zones {{!RFC9609}}.

5. Multi-function name server

   Name servers with multiple functions will act as
   an Authoritative, Recursive Resolver (Full-Service Resolver),
   or Forwarder depending on the namespace to which the query name belongs,
   the server IP address, the "Recursion Desired" bit, etc.
   The data handled by each function MUST be separated.

Additional Considerations
=================

\[ Further directives could be made,
they may be DNS software implementation guidelines,
which would be large in scale,
so it is necessary to consider whether to proceed with them. \]

* If a DNS server plays different roles for different namespaces
  (authoritative server, recursive resolver, forwarder), it MUST NOT
   merge DNS data for each role.

  For example, a recursive resolver that returns a fixed zone
  as a split-horizon DNS can be interpreted as
  acting as an authoritative server below a certain domain name,
  but as a recursive resolver otherwise.

*  The Additional Section returned as the result of name resolution
   MUST be exactly the same as the Additional Section that came from
   the authoritative response from the authoritative server, or a
   separate authoritative response resulting from name resolution.

*  Full-service resolvers SHOULD only accept the following data
   from authoritative servers:
   - NS and DS RRSets (+RRSIG) in the Authority Section
     of the delegation response and Glue A/AAAA in the Additional Section,
   - SOA RRs (+RRSIG) in the Authority Section
     of authoritative NXDOMAIN and NODATA responses in response to the query,
   - the Answer Section (+RRSIG) of the authoritative response
     in response to the query, and
   - any additional sections allowed by type (delegated domain name),
   
   and SHOULD NOT accept any other information.

IANA Considerations {#iana}
====================
{:#iana}
This document requests no IANA actions.

Security Considerations {#security}
=====
{:#securitycons}

--- back
